rint-343.txt  Last edited 2004-10-05 for NetHack 3.4.3
Ring intrinsics in NetHack 3.4
Compiled by Dylan O'Donnell <psmith@spod-central.org>.

This spoiler covers all intrinsics that may be granted by wearing rings,
other than the dragon resistances already dealt with in drgn-343.txt:
how to acquire them (in addition to their ring source), how to lose them,
and what effects they have. Note that, as a general rule, any intrinsics
acquired solely by experience level can be lost by being drained below
that level.

aggravate monster
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of aggravate monster.
    Eating a corpse of your own natural race (werecorpses and Kops count as
    human), or a little dog, dog, large dog, kitten, housecat or large cat;
    Cave(wo)men and orcs are exempt from this.
    Sacrificing a former pet.
    Intrinsic aggravate monster may be lost by night-time gremlin attack.
      "You feel less attractive."
  effects
    Mistreated pets become untame more quickly.
    Sleeping monsters (other than leprechauns, nymphs, and jabberwocks)
    will always wake up at your approach unless you are stealthy.

cold resistance
  [See drgn-343.txt]

conflict
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of conflict.
    #invoking the Sceptre of Might (Cave(wo)man Quest Artifact).
  effects
    Increases hunger rate by 50% of normal (except from Sceptre).
    Nearby monsters in line of sight may attack each other instead of you.
    Even peaceful monsters and pets may attack you.
    Steeds may throw you.
    Monsters lose restraint in attacking *trices.
    Pets lose restraint in attacking peaceful monsters.
    Mistreated pets become untame more quickly.
    d4 hostile Angels created on Astral Plane in place of tame guardian
    Angel.

fire resistance
  [See drgn-343.txt]

free action
  acquired by
    Wearing a ring of free action. (Not eating; that confers sleep
    resistance.)
  effects
    Protects against paralysis attacks of gelatinous cubes, guardian nagas,
    ghouls, shades, and Yeenoghu.
    Protects against passive paralysis attacks of gelatinous cubes and
    floating eyes.
    Paralysis and stunning spells cast by monsters have their effect reduced
    to one turn.
    Protects against quaffed or thrown potions of paralysis or sleeping.
    Protects against paralysis effect of chest traps.
    Protects against self-paralysis from looking into a mirror as a
    floating eye.

hunger
 acquired by
   Wearing or eating a ring of hunger.
 effects
   Increases hunger rate by 50% of normal.

invisibility
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of invisibility.
    Wearing a cloak of invisibility.
    Quaffing a potion of invisibility (lasts 31 to 45 (more) turns if
    non-blessed).
    Zapping a wand of make invisible at yourself.
    Eating a stalker (lasts 50 to 149 turns if not already invisible; if
    only temporarily invisible, made permanent ("You feel hidden!")).
    Polymorphing into a stalker or black light.
    #invoking the Orb of Detection (Archeologist Quest Artifact).
    Intrinsic invisibility may be lost to night-time gremlin attack.
      "You feel paranoid."
  effects
    No effect from looking into a mirror.
    Monsters without see invisible will be less likely to be aware of
    your location for approaching and attacking you.
    Monsters without see invisible have a to-hit penalty when attacking you.
    Shopkeepers will prevent you entering their shop.
    If polymorphed into a monster with a gaze attack or defence, you cannot
    use it against monsters without see invisible.

levitation
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of levitation (the latter for 10 to 200 turns).
    Wearing levitation boots.
    Quaffing a potion of levitation (lasts 10 to 149 (more) turns if not
    blessed, 250 to 299 (more) turns if blessed).
    Casting a spell of levitation (lasts 10 to 149 (more) turns if unskilled
    or basic, 250 to 299 (more) turns if skilled or expert).
    #invoking the Heart of Ahriman (Barbarian Quest Artifact).
    Polymorphing into any e.
    May be lost by passing over a sink (unless polymorphed into e, or
    acquired by eating a ring).
    If the only source(s) of levitation are from a blessed potion, a
    skilled or expert spell, and/or the Heart of Ahriman, you can stop
    levitating with '>' at will.
  effects
    Cannot jump, set bear traps or land mines, dig downwards with an
    implement, sit, untrap traps, or spin webs.
    Cannot engrave other than with wands of magic missile, digging,
    fire, or lightning.
    Cannot pick up (except possibly by applying a bullwhip), feel, eat,
    sacrifice, loot, lock or unlock items on the floor.
    Cannot dip items into fountains or water.
    Cannot quaff from fountains or sinks.
    Cannot push boulders.
    Cannot mount non-flying steeds unless levitating at will.
    Fragile items will usually break when dropped.
    When punished, iron balls will not drag you into traps they move onto.
    Kicking requires wall, stone or door to brace against; doors cannot
    be kicked open.
    Kicking and throwing may lead to floating in opposite direction.
    Kicking tiny monsters may "miss wildly" and abuse dexterity.
    Can pass over pits, holes, trap doors, squeaky boards, bear traps, water
    or lava safely. (Pits and holes in Sokoban will still trap you.)
    Land mines have a chance of not being triggered, and will not wound your
    legs.
    Engravings will not be eroded by you.
    Improved chances of avoiding death by drawbridge.
    Can move freely when fumbling, over ice or on the Plane of Air.
    Carrying capacity is at maximum.
    Cannot descend stairs or ladders.
    You are out of reach of xans' attacks.
    You escape the dungeon rather than dying by level teleporting to levels
    between -9 and -1.    

poison resistance
  [See drgn-343.txt]

polymorph control
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of polymorph control.
  effects
    You can choose what monster to become when polymorphed (if that monster
    is available to be polymorphed into at all); still 1/5 chance of "You
    feel like a new <race>!".
    You are immune from system shock.
    You can decline a lycanthropic change of form.

polymorphitis
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of polymorph.
  effects
    Every turn there is a 1% chance that you will polymorph (for 500 to 999
    turns, unless you polymorph again earlier; reduced if monster form
    higher level than you).

protection
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of protection.
    Wearing a cloak of protection.
    Casting a spell of protection (temporary).
    Donating between 400 and 600 times your experience level in gold to
    any temple priest.
    Praying to a god whom thou hast pleased with thy progress.
    Intrinsic protection may be lost by night-time gremlin attack ("You
    feel vulnerable."), by angering your god, by changing alignment, by
    killing a co-aligned priest, or by attempting to wear a helm of
    opposite alignment (and being prevented) on the Quest.
  effects
    Your armour class is reduced by the amount of protection.

protection from shape changers
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of protection from shape changers.
  effects
    Chameleons, doppelgangers, and sandestins take their natural form rather
    than shapeshifting.
    (Giant, large) mimics take their natural form rather than mimicking.
    Werejackals, werewolves, and wererats take their human forms and cannot
    summon help.
    Protects against lycanthropy-infecting attacks of werejackals,
    werewolves, and wererats.

regeneration
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of regeneration.
    Wielding the Staff of Aesculapius (Healer Quest Artifact).
    Polymorphing into an imp, quasit, vampire bat, or any of LTV.
    Being in animal form while lycanthropic.
  effects
    If in natural form, regain 1 HP on turns you would not normally
    heal up; negates slowing effect of encumbrance on healing.
    If not in natural form, regain 1 HP per turn no matter what.
    Exercises strength every five turns if from eating a ring.
    Increases hunger rate by 50% of normal (if regeneration ring-derived).

searching
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of searching.
    Wielding Excalibur.
    Reaching XL 9 as a Monk, XL 10 as an Archeologist, Rogue or Tourist; or
    from the start as a Ranger.
      "You feel perceptive!"
  effects
    Automatically search the surrounding squares each turn.

see invisible
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of see invisible.
    Quaffing a potion of see invisible (lasts 750 to 849 (more) turns if
    non-blessed).
    Quaffing from a fountain (if blind and invisible, "You feel very
    self-conscious"; if blind and not invisible, "You feel transparent";
    if not blind, "You see an image of someone stalking you.").
    Sitting on a throne ("Your vision becomes clear").
    Being crowned.
    Eating a stalker while invisible.
    Polymorphing into a (master) mind flayer, black light, Aleax, any adult
    dragon, stalker, sasquatch, Woodland-elf, Green-elf, Grey-elf, elf-lord,
    Elvenking, marilith, ice devil, pit fiend, or balrog.
    Reaching XL 15 as a Ranger; or from the start as a Monk.
      No message.
    Intrinsic see invisible may be lost by night-time gremlin attack.
      "You thought you saw something!"
      "You tawt you taw a puttie tat!" (hallucinating)
  effects
    You can see monsters which would otherwise not be seen due to their
    invisibility.
    You can see yourself while invisible.

shock resistance
  [See drgn-343.txt]

slow digestion
  acquired by
    Wearing a ring of slow digestion (can't be eaten).
  effects
    Eliminates normal turn-by-turn food consumption.
    Protects against digestion attacks of lurkers above, trappers, and
    purple worms; you do no damage with digestion attacks when polymorphed
    into these monsters.

stealth
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of stealth.
    Wearing an elven cloak or elven boots.
    Carrying the Heart of Ahriman (Barbarian Quest Artifact).
    Praying to a god whom thou hast pleased with thy progress.
    Reaching XL 5 as a Monk, XL 7 as a Ranger, or XL 15 as a Barbarian or
    Samurai; or from the start as an Archeologist, Rogue or Valkyrie.
      "You feel stealthy!"
    Intrinsic stealth may be lost by night-time gremlin attack.
      "You feel clumsy."
  effects
    Sleeping monsters will not be awakened by your approach (other
    than ettins, who have a 90% chance of overcoming this).
    Monsters in a throne room, zoo, graveyard or swamp will not be
    awakened by your entrance.

sustain ability
  acquired by
    Wearing (not eating) a ring of sustain ability.
  effects
    Your base attributes will not be altered in either direction by anything
    other than polymorph. (The effective value may be modified by extrinsic
    factors, but the base value will be fixed.)

teleport control
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of teleport control.
    Carrying the Master Key of Thievery (Rogue Quest Artifact).
    Eating a tengu or the Wizard of Yendor.
      "You feel in control of yourself."
      "You feel centered in your personal space." (hallucinating)
    Polymorphing into a tengu.
    Reaching XL 17 as a Monk or Wizard.
      "You feel controlled!"
      "You feel uncontrolled!" (level drain loss)
  effects
    When teleported or level teleported, you can choose the location or
    level you wish to go to (unless unconscious or stunned; confusion
    may result in a level teleport being random).
    You will always try to use teleportitis to escape drowning.

teleportitis
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of teleportation.
    Eating a tengu, leprechaun, any nymph, or the Wizard of Yendor.
      "You feel very jumpy."
      "You feel diffuse." (hallucinating)
    Polymorphing into a tengu, leprechaun, any nymph, or quantum mechanic.
    Intrinsic teleportitis may be lost by night-time gremlin attack.
      "You feel less jumpy."
  effects
    Each turn you have a 1/85 chance of teleporting.
    If you are at least XL 12 (XL 8 if a Wizard), or polymorphed into a
    teleporting monster, you can use the ^T command to teleport at will.
    You may attempt to teleport in order to escape drowning.

warning
  acquired by
    Wearing or eating a ring of warning.
    Carrying the Orb of Fate or the Master Key of Thievery (Valkyrie and
    Rogue Quest Artifacts).
    Reaching XL 7 as a Monk, or XL 15 as a Cave(wo)man, Healer, Priest(ess)
    or Wizard.
      "You feel sensitive!"
  effects
    Non-trivial monsters in your vicinity are shown with a symbol
    indicating their difficulty.

warning against specific monsters
  acquired by
    Wielding Sting (specific to orcs).
  effects
    You are able to see monsters against which you are warned specifically
    no matter where they are on the level.


The following rings do not grant intrinsics, but instead alter combat
modifiers by their enchantment when worn or eaten:

increase accuracy (modifies to-hit roll)
increase damage   (modifies damage roll)

The following rings do not grant intrinsics, but instead modify attribute
values when worn or eaten (note that the attribute changes from eating the
rings will not last when polymorphed, so can only affect the metallivore or
gelatinous cube form that ate the ring):

adornment         (Charisma)
gain constitution (Constitution)
gain strength     (Strength)


Acknowledgements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Corrections and clarifications provided by Kent Paul Dolan, Samson Gafkjen,
David Goldfarb, Kate Nepveu, Pat Rankin, Jason Short, and Boudewijn Waijers.
